ruby quiz.markdown, before:

# Creating your own quiz using Kids Ruby

Ruby is an easy to learn language that was created in the late 1990s by Yukihiro "Matz" Matsumoto as a general purpose programming language. In fact Ruby is the language that is used to create music in Sonic Pi. In this tutorial we will create a quiz using a special application called Kids Ruby.

##Requirements
As well as a Raspberry Pi with an SD card loaded with Raspbian, you'll also need:
###Hardware
- Keyboard
- Mouse
- Screen

###Software
- A copy of Kids Ruby

To use Ruby on your Raspberry Pi we will need to install a special version called "Kids Ruby". This version is ideally suited for this project and it can be installed really quickly.
To install Kids Ruby on your Raspberry Pi you will need to open a terminal, you can do this by double left clicking on the LXTerminal icon that is on your desktop.

![Image of the Raspberry Pi desktop showing the LXTerminal icon](images/LX.png)

To download the file for installation on your Raspberry Pi type the following into the terminal

```Bash
wget https://s3.amazonaws.com/kidsruby/raspbian/kidsruby-1.3.2-armv6l.deb
```
Once downloaded keep the terminal window open and type in the following
```Bash
sudo dpkg -i kidsruby-1.3.2-armv6l.deb
```
![Image of the LXTerminal running the installation command](images/1.png)

This will install Kids Ruby on to your Raspberry Pi. Once it has been installed it will be available via the Programming menu.

![Image of the Raspberry Pi desktop highlighting the location of the Kids Ruby application](images/3.png)

Launch the Kids Ruby application by selecting it from the menu, in a few seconds the application will be ready to use.

![Image of Kids Ruby ready to use](images/4.png)

##Coding our Quiz
With the application installed now we can create our quiz game.

###Creating the sequence
Our quiz is split into three sections of code

- An introduction
- Questions
- Game Over & Final Score

So let's step through each of these sections and understand how they work.
###Section 1: Introduction
In the introduction we first create a variable.

*Variable: A variable is a container into which we can store data. Think of it as an empty box, we can put anything inside of it and then name it for later use.*

In the introduction we create a variable called *answer* and we store a blank value inside of it. We we cover why we do this later in the project.

```Ruby
answer = " "
```
Our attention now turns to welcoming the player. We use *alert* to create a pop up box that welcomes the player to the game.

```Ruby
alert "Welcome to the Hour of Code Quiz"
```
Next we create a new variable called *name* and in there we store the answer to a question that we *ask* the player, that question being "What is your name?"

```Ruby
name = ask "What is your name?"
```
For the next line of our quiz we greet the player by their name, which has has been saved as the variable *name*. But we do something rather clever with this, we use *alert* to create another pop up box that joins "Hello " and the players name together. This is called concatenation.

*Concatenation: Concatenation is the operation of joining character strings end-to-end. For example, the concatenation of "snow" and "ball" is "snowball".*

```Ruby
alert "Hello " + name
```
Next we create a new variable called *score* which will contain the players score. The initial value stored is zero, which is a number, to be exact it is an integer.

*Integer: Is a number that can be written without a decimal place, such as 1, 5 and 9.*

```Ruby
score = 0
```
The last part of our introduction is another *alert* advising the player of their score, which at the start of the game is always zero. You can see that we are again using *concatenation* to join "Your score is " to their actual score. But can you see that score is a little different?
Concatenation can only join *strings* together and our score is an *integer* so the two cannot be joined. To join them together we must temporarily alter score to become a *string* and this is done via *score.to_s*.

*String: A string is traditionally a sequence of characters, for example "Hello" is a string.*

```Ruby
alert "Your score is " + score.to_s
```
###Section 2: Questions
A quiz needs questions, but how do we know if the player has answered them correctly?
In programming we can compare an answer given by the player to what the correct answer is, and until this answer is correct the player cannot progress through the quiz. In Ruby we can instruct the code to repeat a sequence until a certain *condition* is met. In this case we ask a question to the user and give them three possible answers, labelled A, B or C
In the example below, until the player chooses **A** the code will continue to loop.

```Ruby
until answer == "A"
```
So we have set the condition, now we must create the manner in which we ask the player a question. To do this we return to using an *alert*. You will see in the Question text there is **\n** this is an instruction to create a new line of text underneath, similar to when you press Enter on your keyboard.

```Ruby
  alert "Question 1 - Where does Father Christmas / Santa Claus live?\nA: North Pole. B: Santa Monica. C: Cambridge"
 ```
With the question asked we now need to capture their answer and to do that we use *ask* to capture their answer and store it as a variable called *answer*. You'll remember that we created a variable called *answer* at the start of the quiz. Inside that variable we stored a blank value **" "** we did this so that the program would progress. If we hadn't of done this then the quiz would of stopped before it asked the first question.
 
```Ruby
  answer = ask "What is your answer?"
 ```
 
 Now we compare the answer given against the correct answer, and to do this we use an *if* statement.
 
 *if: A conditional statement, where if the condition is met an action is taken.*
 
 In this quiz we ask 
 
 *if the answer given by the user is not the same as "A"*
 
```Ruby
  if answer != "A"
 ```
 So if the answer given by the player is not the same as the answer that we expected, then an alert is created informing the player of a wrong answer and that they should try again.
 
```Ruby
    alert "I'm sorry that's the wrong answer, try again"
  end
end
```
If the player answers correctly, they will skip past the previous loop and will carry on from this point. 
We create a new *alert* that congratulates the player on their correct answer. We then increase their score by 1 point and then inform the player of their current score. Lastly we reset the *answer* variable to blank ready for the next question.

```Ruby
alert "Correct - Well done!!!"
score = score + 1
alert "Your score is " + score.to_s
answer = " "
```
Questions 2 and 3 follow exactly the same pattern as Question 1, the code below is simply changed so that we can ask different questions.

```Ruby
until answer == "A"
  alert "Question 2 - Which reindeer has a bright red nose?\nA: Rudolph. B: Prancer. C: Vixen"
  answer = ask "What is your answer?"
  if answer != "A"
    alert "I'm sorry that's the wrong answer, try again"
  end
end
alert "Correct - Well done!!!"
score = score + 1
alert "Your score is " + score.to_s
answer = " "
until answer == "C"
  alert "Question 3 - What helps reindeer to fly?\nA: Burgers. B: Chicken. C: Magic dust"
  answer = ask "What is your answer?"
  if answer != "C"
    alert "I'm sorry that's the wrong answer, try again"
  end
end
alert "Correct - Well done!!!"
score = score + 1
alert "Your score is " + score.to_s
answer = " "
```
For the last line of our quiz we create a final alert in the same manner as we previously have. This alert informs the player of their score and that the game is now over.

```Ruby
alert "Congratulations you scored "+score.to_s+"\n GAME OVER"
```
Putting this all together it looks like this
![Animation of the quiz sequence](images/quiz.gif)

**Well done! You have made a quiz game using Ruby**

If you would like to learn more about Kids Ruby why not explore the great games and ideas already built in via Hackety-Hack, Ruby Warrior or Make Games with Gosu
![Image of Kids Ruby ready to use](images/4.png)

## Licence

Unless otherwise specified, everything in this repository is covered by the following licence:

[![Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-sa/4.0/88x31.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/)

Commit message:

Updated doc to include section on Kids Ruby layout

ruby quiz.markdown, after:

# Creating your own quiz using Kids Ruby

Ruby is an easy to learn language that was created in the late 1990s by Yukihiro "Matz" Matsumoto as a general purpose programming language. In fact Ruby is the language that is used to create music in Sonic Pi. In this tutorial we will create a quiz using a special application called Kids Ruby.

##Requirements
As well as a Raspberry Pi with an SD card loaded with Raspbian, you'll also need:
###Hardware
- Keyboard
- Mouse
- Screen

###Software
- A copy of Kids Ruby

To use Ruby on your Raspberry Pi we will need to install a special version called "Kids Ruby". This version is ideally suited for this project and it can be installed really quickly.
To install Kids Ruby on your Raspberry Pi you will need to open a terminal, you can do this by double left clicking on the LXTerminal icon that is on your desktop.

![Image of the Raspberry Pi desktop showing the LXTerminal icon](images/LX.png)

To download the file for installation on your Raspberry Pi type the following into the terminal

```Bash
wget https://s3.amazonaws.com/kidsruby/raspbian/kidsruby-1.3.2-armv6l.deb
```
Once downloaded keep the terminal window open and type in the following
```Bash
sudo dpkg -i kidsruby-1.3.2-armv6l.deb
```
![Image of the LXTerminal running the installation command](images/1.png)

This will install Kids Ruby on to your Raspberry Pi. Once it has been installed it will be available via the Programming menu.

![Image of the Raspberry Pi desktop highlighting the location of the Kids Ruby application](images/3.png)

Launch the Kids Ruby application by selecting it from the menu, in a few seconds the application will be ready to use.

![Image of Kids Ruby ready to use](images/4.png)

Kids Ruby uses a simple layout with the screen split into two large sections.

- A large black box, where our Ruby code is typed
- A large box with shortcuts to built in ideas and projects, as well as the output from any code that is written.

Underneath the large black box are a few buttons.

- Save: Saves your project, it's really important to save your work regularly.
- Open: Opens a project that has been saved to your computer.
- Clear: Clears the code in the black box, use with caution.
- Run: Runs the code in the black box.

Let's get coding!

##Coding our Quiz
With the application installed now we can create our quiz game.

###Creating the sequence
Our quiz is split into three sections of code

- An introduction
- Questions
- Game Over & Final Score

So let's step through each of these sections and understand how they work.
###Section 1: Introduction
In the introduction we first create a variable.

*Variable: A variable is a container into which we can store data. Think of it as an empty box, we can put anything inside of it and then name it for later use.*

In the introduction we create a variable called *answer* and we store a blank value inside of it. We we cover why we do this later in the project.

```Ruby
answer = " "
```
Our attention now turns to welcoming the player. We use *alert* to create a pop up box that welcomes the player to the game.

```Ruby
alert "Welcome to the Hour of Code Quiz"
```
Next we create a new variable called *name* and in there we store the answer to a question that we *ask* the player, that question being "What is your name?"

```Ruby
name = ask "What is your name?"
```
For the next line of our quiz we greet the player by their name, which has has been saved as the variable *name*. But we do something rather clever with this, we use *alert* to create another pop up box that joins "Hello " and the players name together. This is called concatenation.

*Concatenation: Concatenation is the operation of joining character strings end-to-end. For example, the concatenation of "snow" and "ball" is "snowball".*

```Ruby
alert "Hello " + name
```
Next we create a new variable called *score* which will contain the players score. The initial value stored is zero, which is a number, to be exact it is an integer.

*Integer: Is a number that can be written without a decimal place, such as 1, 5 and 9.*

```Ruby
score = 0
```
The last part of our introduction is another *alert* advising the player of their score, which at the start of the game is always zero. You can see that we are again using *concatenation* to join "Your score is " to their actual score. But can you see that score is a little different?
Concatenation can only join *strings* together and our score is an *integer* so the two cannot be joined. To join them together we must temporarily alter score to become a *string* and this is done via *score.to_s*.

*String: A string is traditionally a sequence of characters, for example "Hello" is a string.*

```Ruby
alert "Your score is " + score.to_s
```
###Section 2: Questions
A quiz needs questions, but how do we know if the player has answered them correctly?
In programming we can compare an answer given by the player to what the correct answer is, and until this answer is correct the player cannot progress through the quiz. In Ruby we can instruct the code to repeat a sequence until a certain *condition* is met. In this case we ask a question to the user and give them three possible answers, labelled A, B or C
In the example below, until the player chooses **A** the code will continue to loop.

```Ruby
until answer == "A"
```
So we have set the condition, now we must create the manner in which we ask the player a question. To do this we return to using an *alert*. You will see in the Question text there is **\n** this is an instruction to create a new line of text underneath, similar to when you press Enter on your keyboard.

```Ruby
  alert "Question 1 - Where does Father Christmas / Santa Claus live?\nA: North Pole. B: Santa Monica. C: Cambridge"
 ```
With the question asked we now need to capture their answer and to do that we use *ask* to capture their answer and store it as a variable called *answer*. You'll remember that we created a variable called *answer* at the start of the quiz. Inside that variable we stored a blank value **" "** we did this so that the program would progress. If we hadn't of done this then the quiz would of stopped before it asked the first question.
 
```Ruby
  answer = ask "What is your answer?"
 ```
 
 Now we compare the answer given against the correct answer, and to do this we use an *if* statement.
 
 *if: A conditional statement, where if the condition is met an action is taken.*
 
 In this quiz we ask 
 
 *if the answer given by the user is not the same as "A"*
 
```Ruby
  if answer != "A"
 ```
 So if the answer given by the player is not the same as the answer that we expected, then an alert is created informing the player of a wrong answer and that they should try again.
 
```Ruby
    alert "I'm sorry that's the wrong answer, try again"
  end
end
```
If the player answers correctly, they will skip past the previous loop and will carry on from this point. 
We create a new *alert* that congratulates the player on their correct answer. We then increase their score by 1 point and then inform the player of their current score. Lastly we reset the *answer* variable to blank ready for the next question.

```Ruby
alert "Correct - Well done!!!"
score = score + 1
alert "Your score is " + score.to_s
answer = " "
```
Questions 2 and 3 follow exactly the same pattern as Question 1, the code below is simply changed so that we can ask different questions.

```Ruby
until answer == "A"
  alert "Question 2 - Which reindeer has a bright red nose?\nA: Rudolph. B: Prancer. C: Vixen"
  answer = ask "What is your answer?"
  if answer != "A"
    alert "I'm sorry that's the wrong answer, try again"
  end
end
alert "Correct - Well done!!!"
score = score + 1
alert "Your score is " + score.to_s
answer = " "
until answer == "C"
  alert "Question 3 - What helps reindeer to fly?\nA: Burgers. B: Chicken. C: Magic dust"
  answer = ask "What is your answer?"
  if answer != "C"
    alert "I'm sorry that's the wrong answer, try again"
  end
end
alert "Correct - Well done!!!"
score = score + 1
alert "Your score is " + score.to_s
answer = " "
```
For the last line of our quiz we create a final alert in the same manner as we previously have. This alert informs the player of their score and that the game is now over.

```Ruby
alert "Congratulations you scored "+score.to_s+"\n GAME OVER"
```
Putting this all together it looks like this
![Animation of the quiz sequence](images/quiz.gif)

Remember to save your work and when ready click on the **Run** button to start your quiz game.

**Well done! You have made a quiz game using Ruby**

If you would like to learn more about Kids Ruby why not explore the great games and ideas already built in via Hackety-Hack, Ruby Warrior or Make Games with Gosu
![Image of Kids Ruby ready to use](images/4.png)

## Licence

Unless otherwise specified, everything in this repository is covered by the following licence:

[![Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-sa/4.0/88x31.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/)
